[docs] peregrine talons overview (#1876)
magento/pwa-studio: pwa-devdocs/_drafts/talons/index.md

---
title: Talons
---

<!-- TODO: Publish this topic under src/peregrine -->

Most [React component][] contain two distinct sections: a section for logic and a presentational section.

The logic section contains code for generating new values from props, maintaining local state, and lifecycle or side effect methods.
This section can be considered the "brains" of the component.

> The presentational section of a React component contains code that define the component's DOM structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The presentational section of a React component contains code that defines the component's DOM structure.
```

It often uses values from the logic part of the component to pass down into another component or display using HTML elements.

PWA Studio separates these two sections into distinct components with specific concerns: a Venia UI component and a Peregrine Talon.

## Peregrine talon overview

Peregrine talons are the logic component counterparts for Venia UI components.
Each talon in Peregrine is designed to provide data or perform side effects for a specific Venia UI component.

For example, the [`SearchBar`][] component uses the [`useSearchBar()`][] talon to get initial values and functions it needs to handle changes in focus or search term value.
The `useSearchBar()` talon also keeps track of the component's `expanded` state, which determines how the search bar looks.

## Talons versus hooks

Talons are a PWA Studio concept that represent a specialized type of React hook.

> Peregrine **hooks**, such as `useQuery()` and `useWindowSize()`, are designed to be re-usable pieces of code, but

Reviewer: `useQuery` is being deprecated/removed. Use a different one like `useDropdown` maybe.

> Peregrine **talons** are designed to fulfill the logic needs of a single Venia UI component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Peregrine **talons** are designed to fulfill the logic needs of individual Venia UI components.
```

> This means that each talon belongs to a specific UI component in Venia and is not used in any other Venia component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that each talon corresponds to a single Venia component, and may not be useful outside of that component.
```

> For example, the functionality provided by the `useHeader()` talon is only relevant to the the `Header` component.

Reviewer: To expand on this section:

Going forward we may identify pieces of talons that perform identical functionality and that can be moved to a hook. We're being extra careful not to do that just yet because we don't want to create more API surface that we have to support (since this is so new) but we may do this in the future.

Take that as you will -- not sure if it's worth adding anything in here about that.

## Using talons

> Talons are not re-usable hooks, but

Reviewer: This newline is a bit weird.

they make it easier to work with UI components by providing standard functionality.
This lets developers focus on developing the presentation DOM and CSS pieces of a component.

> Venia UI components use talons by default, so

Reviewer: Same here.

developers can use Venia UI components as is without worrying about talons.

> If developers want to change how a Venia UI component looks, they can import its associated talon into a new or modified UI component of the same type.

Reviewer: The extension/customization story isn't quite complete but maybe we want to show an example?

Author: I would rather wait until the story is complete before adding more information about it
